# Lesson 1.5 - Mixtures

In this lesson:

* [What is a mixture?](#what-is-a-mixture)  
* [Properties of mixtures](#properties-of-mixtures)  
* [Seperating mixtures](#seperating-mixtures)  
* [Filtration](#filtration)  
* [Simple distillation](#simple-distillation)  
* [Fractional distillation](#fractional-distillation)  
* [Crystallisation](#crystallisation)  
* [Chromotography](#chromatography)

## What is a mixture?

A mixture is made up of two or more elements or compounds.

They are **not chemically bonded**. No chemical reaction takes place.

## Properties of mixtures

A substance's properties do not change when in a mixture.

The mixture has the same properties as the chemicals it contains.

The chemical properties of each substance in the mixture are unchanged.

> The above sentences mean the same thing.  
> In an exam, write whichever makes most sense to you.

## Seperating mixtures

We can seperate mixtures using one of 5 methods:

* Filtration
* Simple distillation
* Fractional distillation
* Crystallisation
* Chromatography

These are *not* chemical reactions, but instead **physical processes**.  
No reaction takes place and no new substances are formed.

## Filtration

Filtration allows liquid particles to pass through, but not solid particles.

It can be used to remove the solid particles *or* liquid particles from a substance.

It involves a **filter medium**, which allows only certain particles to pass through.

## Simple distillation

Simple distillation allows substances with higher boiling points to be seperated from those with lower boiling points.

It evaporates substances with lower boiling points, leaving those with higher boiling points in the container.

It then *condenses* the evaporated substance into a seperate container.

The result is two containers:

* One with substances with low boiling points
* One with substances with high boiling points

## Fractional distillation

Fractional distillation is used to seperate substances with slightly different boiling points.

Often, it is used to seperate liquids from each other.

Because the substances have different boiling points, we can seperate them in a similar way to [simple distillation](#simple-distillation).

However, we can use it more precisely - it can be used to seperate substances with very similar boiling points - as long as they are not identical.

## Crystallisation

Crystallisation is where we form solid crystals from a solution.

It is very similar to evaporation.

When the solution boils, some of the liquid evaporates.

This leaves behind a concentrated solution, which then forms **crystals**.

## Chromatography

Chromotography needs two things:

* Absorbent paper
* A **solvent**

These two things create a **chromatogram**.

## Contents

[Previous lesson (Compounds)](1.4-Compounds.md)  
[Back to contents](README.md)  
[Next lesson (Discovering The Atom)](1.6-AtomicDiscovery.md)
